I'm Vicki MacDonald and I'm at Holy Trinity Church, Llandudno, during the Longest Yarn.
I'm speaking to Arianne Strange, who's going to tell us about her mum.
Arianne, welcome and I'm dying to hear all your memories.
Well, my mum's name was Joyce May Williams and she lived in Blenai Faustiniogh.
During the war, they used to make hand grenades in Penrinday Drith.
Many a nice used to talk about it when I used to work in the local fish and chip shop.
You'd go home with a bag of chips and you'd share these stories.
And you'd share these stories with your mum and she was happy to talk about it.
And what special things did she tell you? Because it must have been an amazing time.
When they made the hand grenades, they used to leave a message inside.
And I don't think it was the real things they used to put in it.
Like they would say blonde.
Blonde when they went.
And then I remember her saying that one day they had a visit from a soldier whose
this hand grenade had saved his life.
And he came to see the woman that had put her name down.
He'd found the note in the hand grenade and she effectively had saved his life.
Did he say how?
She didn't say properly.
I couldn't.
Well, I can't remember, you know, but he must have used it.
And then he found this message and he came to thank her.
Goodness, that must have been amazing for her.
What sort of messages did they put in?
Do you know?
They used to say blonde, blue eyes, Blenifestiniog and the names.
So they'd come and this lady just had a visit.
Did they all do it?
Was it quite common or was it just your mum doing it?
It was quite common.
And as she was saying, you know, they used to have to wear the turbans
because the powder that they worked with used to bleach the hair.
Oh, right.
And did it damage their, did they wear gloves?
Did it damage their hands?
They used to wear the overalls and things.
It's quite interesting really.
How long did she do that for?
Towards the end of the war because as the war ended,
I think things became normal, didn't they?
And they used to have like the prison of war camps in the area.
Yeah.
And quite a lot of Polish people stayed behind
and married some of the local women.
Oh, oh, right.
So you've got the mixture of the surnames then
and the Italian prisoner of war as well.
So it's quite a mixture of people when I used to go to school.
Was she very surprised when the soldier arrived at the door
thanking her for saving his life?
It wasn't her, it was a friend actually.
Right.
But they had a good laugh about it
and he saw the funny side of things.
Yes.
Amazing that he did it.
So whereabouts did they put these bits of paper on these hand grenades?
I don't know how safe it would have been.
I don't know.
Because I can't, I thought they were just sort of spherical
and did they put them inside or in the box?
We might have to look into it, won't we?
Yes.
Amazing memory.
And did she, did all this stop then at the end of the war?
Yes.
And then came the National Service then, didn't it?
And they had a lot of people coming to the area
because they used to do the training in Transvernay that way.
That's right.
And isn't that factory still there?
I don't know if it's still there but it was there for a long long time.
It was, wasn't it?
And I think there was an explosion once.
Oh right.
If I remember rightly.
So after the war, did your mum then go back to being a housewife
which was one of the problems, wasn't it?
The men came back and the women went back to the kitchen.
Well she met my dad then and they got married
and I think she came of as all-time housewife because there was five of us.
But it's such a wonderful story.
It's lovely to see that you've got these memories really
when they're not with you anymore.
Yes, I know and she'd be glad to be remembered.
So anything else that you can...
No, I do remember my uncle, my mum's oldest brother.
He signed up when he was underage.
Wow.
And he went over to Germany.
Did he survive?
He did survive and he got a medal and he never spoke about it.
Only later on and he just died a couple of years ago in his 90s.
Oh and he still didn't speak about it?
No.
Even as some of them as they got older did, didn't they?
Yeah, he never spoke about it.
No.
Oh gosh.
I remember my mum used to say about my grandfather, my Tide,
that he was gassed during the war, you know,
that's how he died young, he was only in his 30s.
Gosh, so that's your grandfather in the first World War?
Yes.
Yeah.
Goodness.
Yes, a long line of heroes.
You do remember, don't you?
Yes.
Oh, it's nice to remember them and that's what remembrance is all about, isn't it?
So thank you, Erin, for coming in.
I'm so pleased to speak to you again.
Thank you.